Hello everyone and welcome to our module
on cardiac anatomy.
Let's start by reviewing the major chambers of the heart.
Blood enters the right atrium of the heart
via one of two structures.
The first is the superior vena cava,
which drains blood from above the heart.
The other is the inferior vena cava,
which drains blood from below the heart.
From the right atrium, blood moves into the right ventricle
and from the right ventricle, it is pumped out
via the pulmonary artery and into the lungs.
After blood moves through the lungs,
it enters the left atrium of the heart
via one of four pulmonary veins.
You can find the entrance to the pulmonary veins
in the left atrium.
From the left atrium, blood moves into the left ventricle
and from there, it is pumped into the aorta.
Notice also in this picture
that the walls of the left ventricle
are drawn and they are thicker
than the walls of the right ventricle.
That is the same thing you see in the anatomy lab.
The reason the walls of the left ventricle
are thicker than the right ventricle
is because the left ventricle has to generate
much higher pressures
in order to pump blood to the entire body.
The right ventricle
does not need to generate such high pressures.
Therefore it has thinner walls and less muscle.
There are four valves found in the heart.
The tricuspid valve is located between the right atrium
and the right ventricle.
The pulmonic valve is located between the right ventricle
and the pulmonary artery.
The mitral valve is found between the left atrium
and the left ventricle.
And finally, the aortic valve
is found between the left ventricle and they aorta.
All of these valves have three PASPs or leaflets
except for the mitral valve, which has two leaflets.
We'll talk more about that in a minute.
Shown on the screen is a cardiac MRI image
from a patient of mine.
And I've shown you this to demonstrate
the anterior posterior relationship
of structures inside the chest,
including the heart and great vessels.
So to help orient you,
this is a cross section through the chest.
The black areas on the sides are the lungs
and in the middle of the picture is the heart and the aorta.
Contrast material has been injected
into the vascular system, so that blood appears white.
So in the front of the chest,
we have a structure that is holding blood,
and that is the right ventricle.
Notice that it's an anterior structure.
The right ventricle is anterior to other parts of the heart
and therefore it's often injured in penetrating trauma
that goes through the chest wall.
Though other structures can also be damaged as well.
Behind the right ventricle, there's another structure
holding blood and that is the left ventricle.
Notice that the left ventricle is surrounded by these walls,
which are relatively thick,
notice also that the right ventricle
has walls that are thinner
just like we talked about on the last picture.
This structure in the back of the chest
that I'm circling with my pen is the left atrium.
Notice that the left atrium
sits right on top of this black hole here,
that black hole is the esophagus
and it sits just behind the left atrium.
Behind the esophagus, you find another circular structure
that contains blood and that is the aorta.
So it's helpful to remember that the esophagus sits between
the left atrium and the aorta.
This will help you understand why cardiologists like me
sometimes take pictures of the heart
by inserting a probe in the esophagus.
That test is called a transesophageal echocardiogram.
And the reason we do this is because the esophagus
is right next to the left atrium and the aorta.
It's also very close to the mitral valve right here.
So we can get very close up pictures of these structures
if we place an ultrasound probe in the esophagus.
You should also be aware that if the left atrium
becomes massively dilated,
it can potentially compress the esophagus
and cause dysphasia, this is rare but it's sometimes occurs
in cases of severe mitral stenosis.
And they like you to understand for your boards,
what can be affected
if the left atrium becomes massively dilated.
And now that you've seen this picture,
hopefully this will help you remember
that the esophagus is right next to the left atrium.
Let's talk about coronary arteries.
If you look at the picture on the screen,
this red structure here
that I'm drawing a line through with my pen is they aorta.
Coming off of the aorta
are two vessels that supply blood to the heart.
The first one is called the left main coronary artery.
It bifurcates into two vessels, the LAD,
the left anterior descending coronary artery,
and the left circumflex coronary artery.
The LAD artery supplies blood to the interior walls
of the left ventricle,
the left circumflex supplies blood to the lateral wall
of the left ventricle.
Also coming off of the aorta is the right coronary artery.
It supplies blood to the right ventricle
and then wraps around the side of the heart
and goes underneath.
The posterior descending artery
is not shown in this picture,
but it supplies blood to the inferior wall
of the left ventricle.
In about 90% of people,
the PDA is a branch of the right coronary artery
and we call those people right dominant.
In 10% of people, the PDA
is a branch of the left circumflex,
and we call those people left dominant.
Venous blood that drains away from the myocardium
goes into a structure called a coronary sinus,
not shown on this picture.
Coronary sinus drains into the right atrium,
just like lots of other venous blood.
And you're sometimes asked on board exams,
what could cause a dilated or enlarged coronary sinus?
And the answer is anything that raises the pressure
in the right atrium because the coronary sinus
drains blood into the right atrium.
If the pressure is high in the right atrium,
coronary sinus can become enlarged.
When you hear people talking about myocardial infarctions,
they'll often say that a patient
had an anterior wall myocardial infarctions
or an inferior wall or a lateral wall myocardial infarction.
And what they're referring to when they use those terms
are the walls of the left ventricle.
When people have heart attacks,
we wanna know which walls of the left ventricle
are involved.
And it's important for you as a medical student
to understand which blood vessels supply
which walls of the left ventricle.
So let's talk about that now.
These are the coronary artery territories
supplied by each vessel.
So the anterior wall, the anterior septum
between the ventricles and the apex of the left ventricle
is all supplied by the left anterior descending artery.
And this is easy to remember
because the artery has the word anterior in its name.
The lateral wall of the left ventricle
is supplied by the left circumflex.
And I used to remember this by just thinking of the vessel
as the lateral circumflex instead of the left circumflex,
use that if you wish.
And then finally the inferior wall and the inferior septum
between the left and right ventricle
are supplied by the PDA.
And as I told you on the last side, in 90% of patients,
the PDA comes off the right coronary artery.
The other 10% of people are called left dominant,
in these patients, the left circumflex supplies the PDA.
And in terms of myocardial infarctions,
the LAD is the artery that is most commonly infarcted.
The circumflex is the least likely to be infarcted
and RCA is in the middle.
And I talk about all this in more detail
in the modules on ischemia.
Let's talk about the mitral valve,
the mitral valve has two leaflets,
an anterior leaflet, and a posterior leaflet.
And the leaflets are tethered to two papillary muscles
by structures called chordae tendineae,
which I'm circling in this picture.
The two papillary muscles
are the anterior lateral papillary muscle
and the posterior medial papillary muscle.
Some people just call them
the anterior and the posterior papillary muscles.
And one thing that's high yield for you to know
about these two papillary muscles,
is that the entire lateral papillary muscle
usually has a dual blood supply
from both the LAD and the circumflex.
This makes it relatively resistant to ischemia
because for example,
if you had an infarction in the left circumflex artery,
the anterolateral papillary muscle
would still get blood from the LAD.
The posterior medial papillary muscle on the other hand
often has a single blood supply,
usually from the right coronary artery
or sometimes from the circumflex.
What this means is that
the posterior medial papillary muscle
is more vulnerable to ischemia
and can potentially rupture
in the setting of a myocardial infarction.
In the ischemia modules, I talk about the fact
that one of the dangerous consequences
of myocardial infarction is for a papillary muscle
to rupture.
The patient will develop severe mitral regurgitation
and acute heart failure and this is often a fatal event.
The papillary muscle that often ruptures
is the posterior medial papillary muscle.
This often occurs in the setting
of an inferior wall myocardial infarction,
and the reason it's the posterior medial papillary muscle
that usually ruptures
is because it has a single blood supply in most cases.
I'll finish by reviewing
the anatomy of the cardiac electrical system.
So electrical activity through the heart
is generated under normal circumstances by the SA node,
which is found on the lateral wall of the right atrium.
From the SA node, electrical activity
goes through both atria,
but it can only reach the ventricle
by going through the AV node.
The AV node is found on the inner atrial septum.
This is the wall between the left and right atria.
From the AV node, electrical activity
travels through the His-Bundle
and then the right bundle branch and the left bundle branch
and finally it travels to the Purkinje fibers.
The His-Bundle is located on the interventricular septum.
This is the wall between the right ventricle
and the left ventricle.
And in general, the SA and AV node
are usually supplied
by branches of the right coronary artery.
And that concludes our module on cardiac anatomy.